>> Hey, Stan.
>> Hello.
>> Hello. Welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
>> I'm glad to be here. Glad to talk performance.
>> I know. I'm excited to talk performance.
It's one of those things that I just never get tired
of thinking about and focusing on.
It's just so multifaceted.
As we will see, even for a language like Python
that is not primarily performance-focused,
there's a lot to talk about.
>> Yeah, there's an endless bag of tricks.
>> Yeah. I would say,
to undercut my own comment there,
Python is increasingly focusing on performance
since 3.10 or so, right?
>> The secret is that it's
because Python integrates so well with other languages,
it always cared about performance in some way.
Just sometimes you had to leave Python to do it.
But you still got to keep the Python interface.
>> There's been such an easy high-performance escape hatch
that making Python itself faster is obviously not unimportant,
but maybe not the primary focus, right?
Like usability, standard library, etc.
All right. For people who have not heard your previous episode,
let's maybe just do a quick introduction. Who's Stan?
>> Yeah. I'm Stan Siebert.
I am a manager at Anaconda.
Well-known purveyor of Python packages and such.
My day-to-day job is actually
managing most of our open-source developers at Anaconda.
That includes the Numba team,
and so we'll be talking about Numba today,
but other things like we have people working on
Jupyter and Beware for mobile Python and other projects like that.
That's what I do mostly is focus on,
how do we have an impact on the open-source community,
and what does Python need to stay relevant and keep evolving?
>> I love it. What a cool job as well.
>> I'm really grateful. It's a rare position,
so I'm really glad I've been able to do it for so long.
>> Yeah. I would also throw out in the list of things
that you've given a shout out to,
I would point out PyScript as well.
>> Oh, yes. Of course. I just
started managing the PyScript team again actually,
and so I forgot about that one too.
Yes, PyScript. Python in your web browser,
and Python everywhere, on your phone,
in your browser, all the places.
>> Yeah. I mean, it's a little bit out of left field
compared to the other things that you all are working on,
but it's also a super important piece I think.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Really cool. Really cool there.
So I think we set the stage a bit,
but maybe let's start with Numba.
That one's been around for a while.
Some people know about it, others don't.
What is Numba and how do we make Python code faster with Numba?
>> Yeah. So there have been a lot of
Python compilation projects over the years.
Again, Numba is very fortunate that it's now 12 years old.
So we've been doing it a long time,
and I've been involved with it
probably almost 10 of those years now.
I think one of Numba's success points is trying to stay
focused on an area where we can have a big impact,
and that is trying to speed up numerical code.
So there's a lot of, again,
data science and other sciences,
there's a lot of need to write custom algorithms that do math.
Numba's sweet spot is really helping you to speed those up.
So we see Numba used in a lot of places where
maybe the algorithm you're looking for isn't
already in NumPy or already in JAX or something like that.
You need to do something new.
Projects like UMAP, which do really novel clustering algorithms,
or I just at SciPy,
I learned more about a project called Stumpy,
which is for time series analysis.
Those authors were able to use Numba to take the numerical core of that project,
that was the time bottleneck,
and speed it up without having to leave Python.
So that is, I think,
really where Numba's most effective.
>> Sure. If you look at a lot of programs,
there might be 5,000 lines of code or more,
but even just something only as big as 5,000 lines,
there's a lot of code,
but only a little bit of it really actually matters, right?
>> Yeah. That's what we find a lot is when you sit down and measure your code,
you'll spot some hotspots where 60 or 70 or
80 percent of your time is spent in just like three functions or something.
That's great. If that's the case,
that's great because you can just zero in on that section for speeding things up,
and not ruin the readability of the rest of your program.
Sometimes optimization can make it harder to read the result,
and so there's always a balance of you have to keep maintaining this project.
You don't want to make it unreadable just to get five percent more speed.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Not just the readability,
but the ability to evolve it over time.
Maybe you're like, "Oh, we're going to compile this section
here using Numba or Cython or something like that."
Well, maybe I was going to use this cool new IPI package I found,
but I can't just jam it in there where it's compiled.
That's unlikely to work well, and things like that.
A lot of times, there's these big sections that look complicated,
they look slow, they're not actually.
>> Yeah. One thing I also often emphasize for people is that,
when you think about the time your program takes,
think about the time you spent working on it,
as well as the time you spent running it.
Because we've heard from a lot of projects who said,
they were able to get major speedups,
not necessarily because Numba compiled their code to be incredibly fast,
but it compiled it to be fast enough that they could try new ideas quicker.
They got to the real win,
which was a better way to solve their problem,
because they weren't mired in boilerplate coding.
>> Right. It turns out I learned I should use a dictionary and not a list,
and now it's 100 times faster.
That wasn't actually a compiling thing,
that was a visibility thing or something, right?
>> Yeah. Try more things is always helpful.
A tool that lets you do that is really valuable.
>> A hundred percent. What tools do you recommend for knowing?
Because our human intuition sometimes is good,
but sometimes is really off the mark in terms of
thinking about what parts are slow, what parts are fast.
>> Yeah. That's something I definitely when I've talked to people,
everyone thinks they know where the slow part is,
but sometimes they're surprised.
You definitely, before you do anything,
this is not just Numba advice,
this is anytime before you're going to speed up your program, measure something.
What you want is you want a representative benchmark,
something that's not going to run too fast,
because often unit tests run too
quickly to exercise the program in a realistic way.
You want a benchmark that doesn't run too long,
but maybe five minutes or something.
Then you're going to want to run that through profiling tool.
There are several options.
I just usually tell people to use CProfile.
It's built into the standard library in Python.
It's a great tool, it does the job for most stuff.
Sometimes there may be other tools,
things like SnakeViz and other things that help you
interpret the results of the profile,
but often you'll use CProfile to collect the data.
What this does is it records as the program is running,
what are all the functions that are being
called and how much time are they taking.
There are different strategies for how to do this,
but fundamentally what you get out is
a essentially a dataset that says,
2 percent of the time in your program,
this function was running and 3 percent of this function was running.
You can just sort that in descending order and
look and see what pops out at the top.
Sometimes you're surprised, sometimes you find out it's,
actually it wasn't my numerical code,
it's that I spent 80 percent of my time doing
some string operation that I didn't
realize I needed to do over and over again.
>> Right. Exactly.
Some weird plus equals with a string was
just creating a thousand strings
to get to the endpoint or something like that.
>> Yeah. I could have just done that once up front.
It's good to do the profiling just to make sure
there isn't an obvious problem
before you get into the more detailed optimization.
>> Before you start changing your code completely,
it's execution method or whatever.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Shout out to the PyCharm folks.
They've got to push the button to
profile and they've got to visualize it,
and they just run CProfile right in there.
So that's like CProfile on easy mode.
You get a spreadsheet and you get a graph.
What about other ones like Bill,
FIL or anything else?
Any other recommendations?
>> Yeah. That's an interesting point.
CProfile is for compute time profiling.
An interesting problem you run into is what this tool does,
which is memory profiling,
which is often a problem when you're scaling up.
That's actually one of the other good things
to keep in mind when you're optimizing,
is what am I trying to do? Am I trying to get done faster?
Am I trying to save on compute costs?
Am I trying to go bigger?
I have to speed things up so that I
have room to put more data in.
If that's where you're going, you might want to look.
>> Or am I just out of memory?
>> Yeah. Or am I already stuck?
There it is very easy in Python to
not recognize when you have temporary arrays and things.
Because again, it's also very compact
and you're not seeing what's getting allocated.
You can accidentally blow up your memory quite a lot.
This kind of a profiler is a great option for it.
What it can often show you is a line by line.
This is how much memory
was allocated in each line of your program.
You can see, oh, that one line of pandas,
oops, that did it.
>> Yeah. I can't remember all the details.
I talked to Ipmar about this one,
but I feel like it also keeps track of the memory used,
even down into NumPy and below,
not just Python memory where it says,
now there's some opaque blob of data science stuff.
>> Yeah. Actually, even on the compute profiling,
there's two approaches.
CProfile is focused on counting function time.
But sometimes you have a long function
and if you're making a bunch of NumPy calls,
you might actually care line by line how much time is being taken.
That can be a better way to think about it.
I think the tool is called LineProf.
I forget the exact URL,
but it's an excellent tool in Python for,
there's one in R and there's an equivalent one.
Yes.
>> LineProfile.
>> LineProfile. There you go.
>> It's archived.
>> Oh, it's archived. Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> I have to find another tool now.
This is my go-to for so long.
I didn't realize it had already been archived.
>> If it still works, it's all good.
>> It's been transferred to a new location,
so that's where it lives now.
Line profiling is another.
I often use them complimentary tools.
Is I zero in on one function with CProfile,
and then I'll go line profile that function.
>> Oh, interesting.
>> Drill in further.
>> Yeah. This is the general area.
Now let's really focus on it.
Memray is another one.
I talked to the folks from Bloomberg about that.
>> Oh, okay. I have not used this one.
>> Yeah. This is a pretty new one and it's quite neat the way it works.
This one actually tracks C and C++ and other aspects of allocations as well.
One of the problems you can run into with profiling is,
especially memory profiling I think,
although if you just want to know about memory,
but the more you monitor it,
the more it becomes a Heisenberg quantum mechanics type thing.
Once you observe it, you change it.
The answers you get by observing it are not actually what are happening.
You got to keep a little bit of an open mind towards that as well.
>> Yeah. That's even a risk with the compute side of the profiling.
You're using some compute time to actually observe the program,
which means that it can,
and these tools try to subtract out that bias,
but it does impact things.
You may want to have a benchmark that you can run as your real source of truth.
That you run without the profiler turned on just to see a final runtime.
Run with the profiler to break it down,
and then when you're all done, you're going to want to run
that program again with the profiler off to
see if you've actually improved it while clock time-wise.
>> Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
That's a really good point. Maybe do a percent time type of thing.
>> Yeah.
>> Something along those lines.
Anything else we're talking about that?
>> That was a little bit of a side deep dive into profiling.
Because before you apply some of these techniques like Numba and others,
you certainly want to know where to apply it.
Part of that is you might need to rewrite your code a little bit to make it
more optimizable by Numba or these things.
First of all, what do you do to use Numba?
You just put a decorator on there and off you go?
>> At the very simplest level,
Numba's interface is supposed to be just one decorator.
Now, there's some nuance obviously and other things you can do,
but we tried to get it down to,
for most people, it's just that.
The end in NGIT means no Python,
meaning this code is not calling the Python interpreter anymore at all.
It is purely machine code, no interpreter access.
>> Interesting. Some of these compiled,
do a thing and compile your Python code to machine instructions.
I feel like they still interact with like
high object pointers and they still work with the API of the Python data types.
>> Yeah.
>> Which is nice, but it's a whole lot slower of an optimization.
Then now it's int32 and it's float32 and these are on registers.
>> This is part of the reason why Numba focuses on numerical code,
is that NumPy arrays and actually other arrays in
PyTorch and other things that support the buffer protocol.
Really when Numba compiles this,
it compiles two functions.
One is a wrapper that handles the transition from
the interpreter into no Python land as we call it.
Then there's a core function that is like
you could have written in C or Fortran or something.
That wrapper is actually doing all the Py object stuff.
It's reaching in and saying,
this integer I'm going to pull out the actual number.
This NumPy array, I'm going to reach in and grab the data pointer
and pass those down into the core where all the math happens.
The only time you interact with the interpreter is really at the edge.
Then once you get in there,
you try not to touch it ever again.
Now Numba does have a feature that we added some years ago called an object mode block,
which lets you in the middle of your no Python code,
go back and actually start talking to the interpreter again.
>> Maybe use a standard library feature or something.
>> Yeah. The most common use we've seen is
you want a progress bar to update or something.
That's not in your hot loop.
You don't want to be going back to
the interpreter in something that's really performance critical,
but inside of a function,
you might have parts that are more or less,
one out of a million iterations I want to
go update the progress bar or something.
That's totally valid and you can do that with Numba.
There's a way to get back to the interpreter if you really need to.
>> Okay. Yeah. It says,
it takes and translates Python functions to optimize machine code at runtime,
which is cool. That makes deploying it super easy.
You don't have to have compiled wheels for it and stuff.
Using industry standard LLVM compilers and
then similar speeds to C is in Fortran.
Which is awesome,
but also has implications, if I can speak.
For example, when I came to Python,
I was blown away that I could just have integers as big as I want.
I keep adding to them, they just get bigger and bigger,
and billions, bazillions of bits of accuracy.
It came from C++ and C#,
where you explicitly said it's an N32,
it's an N64, it's a double.
These all had ranges of valid numbers and then you've got
weird wraparounds and maybe you create an unsigned one,
so you can get a little bit bigger.
I suspect that you may fall victim or be subjected to
these types of limitations without realizing them in Python,
if you add and get it because you're back in that land, right?
Or do you guys magic to allow it?
>> We do not handle the big integer,
which is what you're describing as that integer that can grow without bound.
Because our target audience is very familiar with NumPy,
NumPy looks at numbers the way you describe from C++ and other languages.
>> The detail and all that stuff, right?
>> Yeah. NumPy arrays always have
a fixed size integer and you get to pick what that is,
but it has to be 8, 16, 32, 64.
Some machines can handle bigger, but that it is fixed.
Once you've locked that in,
if you go too big,
you'll just wrap around and overflow.
Yeah, so that limitation is definitely present again in Numba,
but fortunately, NumPy users are already familiar with thinking that way.
It isn't an additional constraint on them too much.
>> Right. Okay. Then one thing you said was that you should focus on using arrays.
>> Yes.
>> That kind of data structures before you apply Numba JIT compilation to it.
Does that mean list as in bracket,
bracket or these NumPy type vector things?
We all have different definitions of what an array is.
>> Yes, that's right. Array to big. I would say,
generally, yeah, usually the go-to I talked about is a NumPy array,
so it has a shape.
The nice thing, NumPy arrays can be multidimensional,
so you can represent a lot of complex data that way,
but within an array,
there's a fixed element size.
That element could be a record.
If you want for every cell in your array to
store maybe a set of numbers or a pair of numbers,
you can do that with custom D types and things,
and Numba will understand that.
But basically, that's the ideal data structure.
Numba does have, we added support a couple of years ago for
other data structures because the downside to a NumPy array is that it's fixed size.
Once you make it, you can't append to it like you can a Python list.
Numba does have support for both what we call typed lists and typed dictionaries.
These are special cases of lists and dictionaries in Python,
where in the case of a list,
every element in the list has the same type,
or in the case of a dictionary,
the keys are all the same type and the values are all the same type.
Those cover a lot of the cases where, again,
when users want to make things where they don't know how long it's going to be,
you're going to append in the algorithm.
A list is a much more natural thing than a NumPy array,
where you might over-allocate or something.
Dictionaries, our dictionary implementation
is basically taken straight from CPython's dictionary implementation.
It's very tuned and very fast in the same way CPython's is.
We just had to modify it a little bit to add this type information.
But it's really good for lookup random items kind of stuff.
Those are available as additional data structures in addition to the array.
>> To use those, I would say from Numba import something like this?
>> Yeah. There are new type in the docs.
I'll show you, you can import
a typed list as a special class that you can create.
The downside, by the way,
is that the reason we have those and we don't just take,
historically Numba used to try and let you pass in a Python list,
is that wrapper function would have to go
recursively through the list of list of list of whatever you might have,
and pop out all of the elements into some format that wasn't all Py objects,
so that the new Python could manipulate them quickly.
Then how do you put it all back if you modify that shadow data structure?
What we realized is that was confusing people,
and actually added a lot of overhead and calling functions took too long.
We instead went up a level and said, "Okay,
we're going to make a new list that you at
the interpreter level can opt into for your algorithm."
Accessing that list from Python is slower than a Python list.
But accessing it from Numba is like 100 times faster.
You have to decide while I'm in this mode,
I'm optimizing for Numba's performance,
not for the Python interpreter performance.
>> Which is reasonable often I'd imagine,
because this is the part you found to be slow.
>> Yeah. That's the trade-off you make.
We would not suggest people use type list just in random places in their program.
>> I heard this is fast.
We're just going to replace all like new rule,
bracket bracket is disallowed.
We're not using this one, right?
>> Yeah. When you're working with Python objects,
Python's data structures can't be beat.
They are so well-tuned that it's
very hard to imagine something that could be faster than them.
>> All right. Maybe one more thing on Numba we could talk about is,
so far I imagine people have been in their mind thinking of,
I have at least running on CPUs,
be that on Apple Silicon or Intel chips or AMD or whatever.
But there's also support for graphics cards, right?
>> Yes. For a very long,
I mean, we've had this again for 10 plus years.
We were very early adopters of CUDA,
which is the programming interface for NVIDIA GPUs.
CUDA is supported by every NVIDIA GPU,
whether it's a low-end gamer card or a super high-end data center card,
they all support CUDA.
That was really nice for people who are trying to get into GPU programming,
you could use inexpensive hardware to learn.
On both Windows and Linux,
Macs don't have NVIDIA GPUs for a long, long time now.
But on Windows and Linux,
you can basically write what they call a CUDA kernel in pure Python.
You can pass up arrays,
either NumPy arrays which then have to be sent to the card
or special GPU arrays that are already on the card.
That is a great way for people to learn a bit more about GPU programming.
I will say, Numba might not be
the best place to start with GPU programming in Python
because there's a great project called Cupy,
C-U-P-Y, that is literally a copy of NumPy,
but does all the computation on the GPU.
Cupy works great with Numba.
I often tell people if you're curious,
start with Cupy,
use some of those NumPy functions to get a sense of
when is an array big enough to matter on the GPU, that sort of thing.
Then when you start wanting to do more custom algorithms,
Numba is where you turn to for that second level.
>> Yeah. I feel like I'm referencing a lot of
Atomars work over here,
but what if we didn't have a NVIDIA GPU?
Is there anything we could do?
>> Yeah. There are other projects.
Things like I mentioned here,
like PyTorch and things have been ported to a number of different backends.
This is one thing the Numba team,
we are frequently talking about is how do we add non-NVIDIA GPU support.
But I don't have any TA on that.
That's something that we just still are thinking about.
But PyTorch definitely,
and you can use PyTorch as an array library.
You don't have to be doing machine learning necessarily.
You can use it just for fast arrays.
It's just most popular because it supports,
JAX is a very similar thing because it
adds the extra features you want for those machine learning models.
But at the core of every machine learning model,
it's just array math.
You could choose to just do that if that's what you want.
Then you can even still pass those arrays
off the Numba at some point in the future.
>> I'm interested. Yeah, I didn't realize there was integration.
>> Because we all understand each other's protocols.
>> Yeah, I didn't realize there was integration with that as well.
>> Yeah. A while back,
we worked with a number of projects to define
a GPU array interface that's used by a number of them,
so that we can see each other's arrays without having to copy the data,
which is very helpful.
>> Yeah. We have a lot more topics than Numba,
but I'm still fascinated with it.
>> Yeah.
>> One of the big, all the rage now is vector databases,
obviously, because I want to query my way through LLM outputs.
Where in 100,000 dimensional space does this question live?
>> Yeah.
>> Or whatever. Is there any integration with that kind of stuff?
>> There's Numba, not directly.
Although Numba does have interfaces,
an easy way to call out to C functions.
A lot of these vector databases are implemented in C or C++ or something.
If you did have a use case where you needed to call out to one of them,
if there was a C function call to make
directly to the underlying library that bypass the interpreter,
you can do that from Numba.
I haven't seen anyone do that yet,
but it's a generic C interface.
>> Yeah. Maybe there's a database driver written in C, in which case,
I don't know all the different databases.
I know there are some that are specifically built for it.
Maybe DuckDB has got something going on here.
But also MongoDB has added vector stuff to it,
and I know they have a C library as well.
>> Yeah. I believe that LanceDB is one I've seen
mentioned by used by a couple of projects that's just for vector.
>> Which one is it called?
>> LanceDB.
>> LanceDB. Okay.
>> Yeah. I heard about it in the context of another Python LLM project.
>> Sure. Okay. Cool.
Well, that's news to me,
but it is a developer-friendly open-source database for AI.
Okay. Brilliant. All right.
Well, like I said,
we have more things to talk about.
>> So many things.
>> So many things. This is super.
Okay. One more thing I want to ask you about here before we go on.
This has a Cython feel to it.
Can you compare and contrast Numba to Cython?
>> Yeah. So Cython
requires you to put in some type information
in order to be able to generate C code that is more efficient.
Numba is mainly focused on type inference.
So we try to figure out all the types in
your function based on the types of the inputs.
In general, although Numba has places where you can put type annotations,
we generally discourage people from doing it because we find that
it adds work and is error-prone
and doesn't really help the performance in the end.
Numba will figure out all the types directly.
>> When it JIT compiles it, if it comes in,
if you call it twice with different types,
does it just say, "Well,
now we're going to need this version of
the function underscore strings list rather than integers list or something?"
>> Yeah. Every Numba-compiled function actually contains
a dispatcher that will look at the argument types and pick the right one.
It's pretty high granularity.
For example, people who are familiar with multi-dimensional arrays
and like Fortran and C know that they lay out the rows and columns in
a different order which has impact on how you do loops and stuff,
for to maximize locality.
Numba can tell the difference between those two cases and
will generate different code for those two cases.
>> Wow.
>> So you as the user don't want to even know.
>> No, you don't want to worry about that.
That's a whole another level.
So you were like, "Okay, well,
if it's laid out in this order,
it's probably this appears on the local cache for the CPU in this way.
So if we loop in that direction,
we'll iterate through the cache instead of
blow through it every loop or something like that."
>> Basically, we want to make sure that LLVM knows
when the step size is one and that's
either on the row or the column axis depending on that.
Because compilers in general are magic.
We are grateful that LLVM exists because they can do so many tricks at that level.
I mean, this is the same thing that powers Clang and other stuff.
So all of macOS compilers are built on LLVM.
So we can leverage all of the tricks they've
figured out in decades of development.
>> Yeah, that's cool. Python itself is compiled with that,
at least on macOS.
I just saw it last night that I have Clang some version,
whatever, and I was just looking at the version for my Python.
It was compiled with that. Cool.
Okay. So what is next?
Let's talk about, we've been on the Numba JIT.
Anthony Shaw wrote an article,
Python 3.13 gets a JIT.
This is a pretty comprehensive and interesting article on what's going on here.
What's your experience with this JIT coming to Python 3.13?
>> Yeah. They've definitely tried to set
expectations here that this first release is really planting a flag.
It's to say, we're going to start building on top of this base.
So as far as I've seen,
the benchmarks for 3.13 are not going to
be like the world on fire kind of stuff.
>> See, we're not throwing away our C code and
rewriting operating systems and JIT in Python.
>> But you have to take a first step.
This is honestly pretty,
it impressed me because Numba as a library,
we can take a lot of risks and do things that I know we can depend on LLVM.
We can do all sorts of stuff that maybe not work for everyone because if
Numba doesn't solve your problem, you just don't use it.
You can just leave it out of your environment.
You don't have to install it.
It's easy to us to zero in on just the problems that we're good at and say,
if this doesn't solve your problem, just leave us out.
When you actually are putting a JIT into the core interpreter,
everyone gets it.
You have to consider,
and Python is so broad that you could grab
two Python experts and they may actually have nothing in common with each other.
But are both equal claim to being experts at using Python,
but they might use them in different domains
and have different libraries they care about and all of that.
>> I feel that way when I talk to
pandas people and I think about me doing web development APIs and stuff.
I'm like, I think I'm really good at Python generally,
good enough to write good apps.
But then I look at this, I'm like,
I don't even really, some of these expressions that go into the filter brackets,
I'm like, I didn't even know that that was possible or really how to apply.
It's weird to both feel really competent and understand it,
but also have it no idea.
I think what you're getting at is,
those are two really different use cases and they're getting the same JIT,
and it has to work for both of them.
But combinatorially explode that problem.
>> Yeah. All the different hardware,
I mean, Numba supports a lot of different computers,
but not everyone that Python supports.
>> Like Micro Python?
>> Yeah. We don't work on HP UX or anything like that necessarily.
Python has an enormous range of supported platforms,
an enormous set of use cases,
and anything you do is going to affect everyone.
This approach, which I would say this copy and patch JIT approach is really
clever because one of the, again,
Numba has to bring,
we build a custom version of LLVM,
it's a little stripped down, but it's mostly still there.
We have to bring that along for the ride.
That's a heavy dependency to put on the core interpreter for everyone.
The clever bit here is they figured out how to have a JIT,
but still do all the compiler stuff at build time.
When you build this copy and patch JIT,
you actually need LLVM,
but only at build time,
and then it can go away.
The person who receives the interpreter doesn't need LLVM anymore.
They've basically built for themselves a bunch of little template fragments.
This is the patching part is basically you're saying,
I've got a bunch of fragments that implement
different opcodes in the bytecode different ways,
and I'm going to string them together,
and then go in and there's a bunch of fill in
the blank spots that I can go in and swap in.
You get your value from here and then you put it over here and all that,
but the actual machine code was generated by
LLVM by the person who built Python in the first place.
>> I see.
>> It just amazes me this works.
I'm excited to see where they go with it.
Because it was a clever way to avoid adding a huge heavy dependency to Python,
but start to get some of that JIT benefit.
>> It looks at some of the common patterns.
I see. We're looping over a list of loads,
or something and replaces that with more native code or something along those lines.
>> Yeah. You essentially have a compiler for a bunch of little recipes.
If I do this pattern,
sub in this machine code, fill in these blanks,
and you just have a table of them.
The challenge there is that there is a combinatorial explosion again of how
many different full-blown compiler like LLVM has a bunch of rules.
It's rule-based. It's saying,
if I see this pattern, I do this replacement,
and it keeps doing all of this.
Then at the end, it says, "Okay,
now I'm going to generate my machine code from those transformations."
If I don't have LLVM at runtime,
I have to figure out what are the best templates up front,
put them in this table.
This is where honestly looking at
different usage patterns will probably be a huge help.
In practice, you could have any sequence of byte codes,
but in reality, you're probably going to have certain ones a lot,
and those are the ones you want to focus on.
I don't know, once we start getting this out in the community
and start getting feedback on it,
I'm curious to see how rapidly it can evolve.
That'll be really interesting.
>> Yeah, and this whole copy and patching jet is,
we often hear people say,
"I have a computer science degree,"
and I think what that really means is I have a software engineering degree,
or I am a software engineering person.
They are not often creating new science,
computer science of theories.
They're more like, "I really understand how
operating system works in programmers and compilers,
and I write JSON APIs or I talk to databases."
But this is like true new research out of legitimate computer science.
>> Yeah, they mentioned,
they cite a paper from 2021.
In computer science, going from paper to
implementation in one of the most popular languages on Earth,
in three years, seems pretty fast.
>> It does seem pretty fast.
It definitely seems pretty fast.
The reason I bring this up is I imagine
that dropping it into one of
the most popular programming languages with
a super diverse set of architectures and use cases,
will probably push that science forward.
>> Yeah. This will be tested
in one of the most intense environments you could imagine.
>> Whatever they did for
their research paper or their dissertation or whatever,
this is another level of putting it
into a test and experimentation to put it into Python.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, wild. Okay.
Hopefully, this speeds things up.
This is going to be interesting because it just happens.
It just happens. If you have Python 3.13,
it's going to be looking at its patterns and possibly swapping out.
>> This is-
>> These recipes.
>> Yeah. This is complementary to all of the techniques
the Faster CPython folks have been doing
all along for many releases now.
>> Yeah.
>> They've been looking at other ways to speed up
the interpreter without going all the way to a full-blown compiler,
which this is getting you the final step.
That's again another interesting place is,
how does this complement those?
I don't know those details,
but it's another tool in the toolbox.
To go back to the beginning,
it's speed is about having a bunch of tools,
and you pick up five percent here and five percent there,
and you pile up enough five percent,
and pretty soon you have something substantial.
>> Yeah. Absolutely. That was the plan, right?
The Faster CPython was to make it multiple times faster by adding
20 percent improvements release over release over release
and compounding percentages basically.
The one thing I don't know about this is,
we've had the specializing adaptive interpreter
that was one of those Faster CPython things that came along.
Is this just the next level of that,
or is this a replacement for that?
I don't know. I'm sure people can.
>> Yeah. I don't know what their roadmap is for that.
Because I think part of this is, this is so new,
I think they got to see how it works in
practice before they start figuring out.
>> I agree. It feels like
an alternative to that specialized adaptive interpreter.
But I don't know.
Maybe some of the stuff they've learned from one,
made it possible or even is just an extension of it.
What do we want to talk about next here?
I think-
>> You want to talk about threads?
>> No. I want to talk about Rust really quick before we talk about it.
Then because that'll be quick and then I want to talk about threads,
because threads will not be as quick and it's super interesting.
It's been a problem that people have been
chipping at for years and years and years, the threads thing.
But what do you think about all this Rust mania?
It's shown some real positive results,
things like Ruff and Pydantic and others,
but it's actually a little bizarrely controversial,
or maybe not bizarre, non-obviously controversial.
>> Yeah. My take on the Rust stuff is I view it in
the same light as when we use C and Fortran historically,
it's just Rust is a nicer language in many ways.
If being a nicer language means it's certainly,
you could have taken any of these things and rewritten them in C a long time ago,
and they would have been faster.
You just didn't want to write that C code.
>> Exactly. We could do this in assembler and you would fly guys.
>> Rust lowering the bar to saying, "Okay,
maybe I'll implement the core of my algorithm outside of Python entirely."
It's interesting and honestly,
I would happily see Rust completely replace
C as the dominant extension language in Python.
The trade-off here, and this is one of those things that's sometimes easy to forget,
again, because the Python community is so diverse,
is when you do switch something to Rust,
you do reduce the audience who can contribute effectively in some cases.
That using Python to implement things has a benefit for the maintainers if it
lets them get more contributions, more easily onboard new people.
I hear this a lot actually from academic software,
where you have this constant rotating students and postdocs and things.
How quickly you can onboard someone who isn't a professional software developer
into a project to contribute to it is relevant.
But I think it's different for every project.
There are some things like, again,
Rust in cryptography makes total sense to me
because that's also a very security conscious thing.
You really don't want to be dealing with C buffer overflows in that code.
The guarantees Rust offers are valuable also.
>> Well, I think that that also makes sense even outside of just security directly.
You're going to build a web server.
It's a nerve-wracking thing to run other people's code on an open port on the Internet.
One of the things I switched to is I recently switched to Granian.
For a lot of my websites,
which is a Rust ACP server.
It's comparable in performance,
slightly faster than other things.
But it's way more,
its deviation from its average is way, way better.
>> So it's just more consistent.
>> More consistent, but also,
yeah, like the average, for example,
the average, where's the versus third-party server?
That's the one I want.
So for against MicroWizKey, for example,
right, it's six milliseconds versus 17 milliseconds.
It's like, whatever.
But then you look at the max latency of 60 versus three seconds.
It's like, oh, hold on.
But the fact it's written in Rust,
I think it's a little bit of extra safety.
All other things being equal.
I mean, obviously, a lot of caveats there.
>> Yeah. Actually, the interesting point about,
and this is not unique to Rust,
this is again the same problem with C and other things,
is that it's a little bit interesting.
On one hand, we're pushing the Python interpreter and JITs and all
this other stuff at the same time as you're
thinking about whether to pull code entirely out of Python.
It creates a barrier where the JIT can't see what's in the Rust code.
If there was an optimization that could have crossed that boundary,
it's no longer available to the compilers.
This is a problem the Numba team has been thinking about a lot
because our number one request,
aside from other GPUs,
is can Numba be an ahead-of-time compiler
instead of a just-in-time compiler?
We were like, superficially, yes, that's straightforward.
But then we started thinking about the user experience
and the developer experience,
and there are some things that you lose when you go ahead of
time that you have with the JIT and how do you bridge that gap?
>> Yeah, it's tricky.
>> We've been trying to figure out some tooling to try and bridge that.
At SciPy, we did a talk on a project we just started called Pixie,
which is a sub-project of Numba that is trying
to which doesn't have Rust support yet,
but that's been one of the requests.
If you go to github.com/numba/pixie.
>> Search engines are pure magic. They really are.
>> Awesome. Founder issue tracker.
But Pixie, we gave a talk about it at SciPy.
It's very early stages.
But what we're trying to do is figure out how to,
in the ahead-of-time compilation,
whether that's C or Rust or even Numba eventually,
capturing enough info that we can feed that back into a future JIT,
so that the JIT can still see what's going on in
the compiled code as a future-proofing ecosystem.
>> Yeah, that's cool. I know some compilers
have profiling-based optimization type things.
You can compile it with some instrumentation,
run it, and then take that output and feed it back into it.
I don't know if I've ever practically done anything with that,
but I go, "That's a neat idea to try it,
let it see what it does, and then feed it back."
Is this like that or what do you think?
>> This is different. This is basically capturing in the library file.
You compiled ahead of time to a library,
capturing the LLVM bitcode so that you could pull it out and
embed it into your JIT which might have other LLVM bitcodes.
Then you can optimize.
You can have a function you wrote in Python that calls a function in C,
and you could actually optimize them together even though
they were compiled at different times,
implemented in different languages,
you could actually cross that boundary.
>> One's like a head of time compilation,
just standard compilation, and one is like a JIT thing,
but it's like we're going to click it together in the right ways.
>> Yeah. Because JITs are nice in that they can see everything that's going on,
but then they have to compile everything that's going on,
and that adds time and latency and things.
Can you have it both ways?
It's really what we're trying to do.
>> It's nice when you can have your cake and eat it too, right?
>> Yes.
>> My cake before my vegetables and it'd be fine.
I said that this Rust thing was a little bit controversial.
I think there's some just,
hey, you're stepping on my square of Python space with a new tool.
I don't think that has anything to do with Rust per se.
It's just somebody came along and made a tool that is now doing something,
maybe in better ways or I don't want to start up a whole debate about that.
But I think the other one is what you touched on is,
if we go and write a significant chunk of this stuff in this new language,
regardless what language it is,
Rust is a relatively not popular language compared to others.
Then people who contribute to that,
either from the Python side were like,
well, there's this big chunk of Rust code now that I don't understand anything about,
so I can't contribute to that part of it.
You might even say, well,
what about the pro developers or the experienced core developers and stuff?
They're experienced in pro at C in Python,
which is also not Rust.
It's this new area that is more opaque to most of the community,
which I think that's part of the challenge.
>> Yeah. Some people like learning new programming languages and some don't.
On some hand, Rust can be,
this is a new intellectual challenge and it
fixes practically some problems you have with C.
In other cases, I wanted to worry about what
this project does and not another programming language.
>> Right.
>> Have to look at your communities and decide what's the right trade-off for you.
>> Maybe in 10 years,
CPython will be our Python and it'll be written in Rust.
>> If we move to WebAssembly and PyScript,
Pyodide land a lot, having that right,
there's a non-zero probability,
but it's not a high number, I suppose.
Speaking of something I also thought was going to have a very near zero probability.
>> Yeah.
>> PEP 703 is accepted.
Oh my goodness. What is this?
>> Yeah. This was, again,
a couple of years ago now or I guess a year ago,
it was finally accepted.
For since very long time,
the Python interpreter has,
because again, threads are an operating system feature that let you
do something in a program concurrently.
Now that all of our computers have four,
eight, even more cores depending on what kind of machine you have,
even your cell phone has more than one core.
Using those cores requires you have
some parallel computing in your program.
The problem is that once you start doing things in parallel,
you have the potential for race conditions.
You have the two threads might do the same thing at the same time or touch the same data,
get it inconsistent, and then
your whole program starts to crash and other bad things happen.
Historically, the global interpreter lock has been
the sledgehammer protection of the CPython interpreter.
But the net result was that threads that were running
pure Python code basically got no performance benefits.
You might get other benefits like you could have
one block on IO while the other one does stuff.
It was easier to manage that concurrency.
But if you were trying to do compute on two cores at the same time in
pure Python code it was just not going to happen because
every operation touches a Python object,
has to lock the interpreter while you make that modification.
>> Now you could write all the multi-threaded code with locks and stuff you want,
but it's really just going to run one at a time anyway.
>> Yeah.
>> A little bit like preemptive multi-threading on a single core CPU.
I don't know, it's weird. I've added all this complexity,
but I haven't got much out of it.
>> The secret of course is that if your Python program contained not Python,
like C or Cython or Fortran,
as long as you weren't touching Python objects directly,
you could release the GIL.
Especially in the scientific and computing and data science space,
multi-threaded code has been around for a long time and we've been using it,
and it's fine. Dask, you can use workers with threads or processes or both.
I frequently will use Dask with four threads,
and that's totally fine because most of the codes in
NumPy and Pandas that release the GIL.
But that's only a few use cases.
If you want to expand that to the whole Python interpreter,
you have to get rid of the GIL.
You have to have a more fine-grained approach to concurrency.
This proposal from Sam Gross at Meta was
basically one of many historical attempts
to get rid of that global interpreter lock.
Many have been proposed and failed historically.
Getting this all the way through the approval process is a real triumph.
At the point where it was really being hotly contested,
my maybe slightly cynical take is,
we have between zero and one more chance to get this right in Python.
Either it's already too late or this is it.
I don't know which it is.
I think there were two main complaints against this change.
Complaint number one was,
you theoretically have opened up a parallel compute thing.
For example, on my Apple M2 Pro,
I have 10 cores, so I could leverage all of those cores,
maybe get a five times improvement.
But single-core regular programming is now 50 percent slower.
That's what most people do and we don't accept it.
That's the one of the size,
the Gilectomy and all that was in that realm, I believe.
The other is yet to be determined,
I think, is much like the Python 2-3 shift.
The problem with Python 2-3 wasn't that the code of Python changed,
it was that all the libraries I like and need don't work here.
>> Right. What is going to happen when we take
half a million libraries that were written in a world that
didn't know or care about threading and are now subjected to it?
>> Yeah. There's two levels of problem there.
There's one that there's work that has to be done to libraries.
It's usually with C extensions that they assumed a global interpreter lock,
and they'll have to do some changes to change that.
But the other one is a much more cultural thing.
Where the existence of the Guild just meant that
Python developers just wrote less threaded code.
>> Yeah. They don't think about locks,
they don't worry about locks,
they just assume it's all going to be fine.
>> Because again, the race condition doesn't protect threaded code from race conditions,
but it just protects the interpreter from race conditions.
You and your application logic
are free to make all the thread mistakes you want.
But if no one ever ran your code in multiple threads,
you would never know.
>> I think that's a super interesting thing,
that it's a huge cultural issue that people don't think about it.
Like I said, I used to do a lot of C++ and C#,
and over there, you're always thinking about threading.
You're always thinking about, well, what about these three steps?
Does it go into a temporarily invalid state?
Do I need to lock this?
C# even had literally a keyword lock,
which is like a context manager.
You say lock curly brace,
and everything in there is like into a lock and out of it.
Because it's just so part of that culture.
Then in Python, you just forget about it and don't worry about it.
But that doesn't mean that you aren't taking five lines of Python code.
Each one can run all on its own,
but taken as a block,
they may still get into these weird states where if
another thread after three lines observes the data,
it's still busted.
It's just the culture doesn't talk about it very much.
>> Yeah. If no one ever runs your code in multiple threads,
all of those bugs are theoretical.
Now, what's going to shift is,
all of those C extensions will get fixed and everything will be,
they'll fix those problems.
Then we're going to have a second wave of everyone
seeing their libraries used in
threaded programs and starting to discover,
what are the more subtle bugs?
Do I have global state that I'm not being careful with?
It's going to be painful,
but I think it's necessary for Python to stay relevant into the future.
I'm a little worried. One of the common questions we hear is,
multiprocessing is fine, why don't we do that?
Definitely, multiprocessing's big challenge
is processes don't get to share data directly.
Even if I have read-only data,
if I have to load two gigabytes of data in every process,
and I want to start 32 of them because I have a nice big computer,
I've just 32X my memory usage just so
that I can have multiple concurrent computations.
Now, there are tricks you can play on things like Linux where you load
the data once and rely on forking to preserve pages of memory.
Linux does cool copy-on-write stuff when you fork.
But that's fragile and not necessarily going to work.
Then the second thing, of course,
is if any of those have to talk to each other,
now you're talking about pickling objects and putting them
through a socket and handing them off.
That is, again, for certain kinds of applications, just a non-starter.
>> Yeah, people just start going, "Well,
we're just going to rewrite this in a language that lets us share pointers."
>> Yeah.
>> Or at least memory in process.
>> Yeah. Again, there are a lot of Python users where they don't need this,
they don't care about this, this will never impact them.
Then there's a whole class of Python users who are desperate for this.
>> Sure.
>> And really, really want it.
>> I think there's a couple of interesting things here.
One, I think this is important for stemming people leaving Python.
I actually don't hear this that much anymore,
but I used to hear a lot of,
"We've left for Go because we need better parallelism,"
or "We've left for this performance reason."
And I don't know that's just a success story of the faster CPython initiative,
or all the people who had been around and decided they needed to leave,
they're gone and we just don't hear them anymore because they left.
It's like, I used to hear them say this at the party,
but then they said they're going to leave,
and I don't hear anyone say they're leaving.
Well, it's because everyone's still here who didn't say that.
I don't know.
But I do think having this as a capability will be important for people to be able
to maybe adopt Python where Python was rejected at the proposal stage.
You know, like, "Should we use Python for this project or something else?
We need threading, we need computational threading, we've got 128 core, it's out."
Right?
And then no one comes and complains about it because they never even started
that process, right?
So it'll either allow more people to come into Python or prevent them for leaving
for that same argument on some projects.
I think that's a pretty positive thing here.
- Yeah.
We don't get to count all of the projects that didn't come into existence
because of the global interpreter lock.
It's easy when you're in it to sort of adjust your thinking to not see the
limitation anymore because you're so used to routing around it.
You don't even stop and think, "Oh, man, I got to worry about threads."
You just don't think threads.
- Yeah.
I'll give...I totally agree.
And I'll give people two other examples that maybe resonate more if this
doesn't resonate with them.
It's...what have I said?
Oh, it's a little bit challenging to write this type of mobile phone application
in Python.
Like, well, it's nearly impossible to write a mobile phone application in Python.
So we're not even focusing on that as an issue because no one is...I know,
beware and a few other things, there's a little bit of work.
So I don't want to like...I'm not trying to talk bad about them.
But as a community, there's not like...it's not a React Native sort of thing or a
Flutter where there's a huge community of people who are just like,
"And we could do this."
And then how do we...like, there's just not a lot of talk about it.
And that doesn't mean that people wouldn't just love to write mobile apps
in Python.
It's just...it's so far out of reach that it's just a little whisper in the corner
for people trying to explore that rather than a big din.
And I think, you know, same thing about desktop apps, right?
Wouldn't it be awesome if we could not have Electron but like some really cool,
super nice UI thing that's almost pure Python?
It would.
But people were not focused on it because no one's trying to do it.
But no one's trying to do it because there weren't good options to do it with, right?
And I think the same story is going to happen around performance and stuff.
- I mean, yeah, just to jump in, you know, since I have to talk about the
beware folks.
I mean, you've described exactly...the reason why we funded the beware
development is because, yeah, if we don't work on that now before people sort of...
there's a lot of work that has to do before you reach that point where it's easy.
And so recently, the team was able to get sort of tier three support for iOS and
Android into CPython 3.13.
So now we're at the first rung of the ladder of iOS and Android support in CPython.
- That's awesome.
- And Toga and Briefcase, the two components of beware, are really focused,
again, on that, yeah, how do I make apps?
How do I make...for desktop and mobile?
And so, but it's, yeah, what we ran into people is that they just didn't even
realize you could even think about doing that.
And so they just...they never stopped to say, "Oh, I wish I could do this in Python,"
because they just assumed you couldn't.
- Yeah.
And all the people who really needed to, like, were required to leave the ecosystem
and make another choice, right?
- Yeah.
And it will take the same amount of...I was going to say, it'll take the same amount
of time with this.
Even once threads are possible in Python, it'll take years to shift the perception.
- Yeah.
And probably some of the important libraries.
All right.
So I'm pretty excited about this.
I was hoping something like this would come, and I didn't know what form it would be.
I said there were the two limitations, the libraries and the culture,
which you called out very awesomely, and then also the performance.
And this one is either neutral or a little bit better in terms of performance.
So it doesn't have that disqualifying, killing of the single-threaded performance.
And the person I'm taking here, I will say, again, because you have to be fairly
conservative with CPython because so many people use it, is that this will be an
experimental option that by default, Python won't turn this on.
You will have Python 3.13, when you get it, will still have the global
interpreter locked.
But if you build Python 3.13 yourself or you get another kind of experimental build
of it, there's a flag now at the build stage to turn off the GIL.
So in this mode, they decided to make, you know, not have to make double negatives.
This is Python in free-threading mode.
And that will be an experimental thing for the community to test, to try out,
to benchmark, and do all these things for a number of years.
They've taken a very measured approach, and they're saying, "We're not going to force
the whole community to switch to this until it's proven itself out."
Everyone's had time to port the major libraries, to try it out,
to see that it really does meet the promise of not penalizing single-threaded
stuff too much.
- Yeah, or breaking the single-threaded code too much, yeah.
- Yeah.
And so, the steering council is reserving the right to decide when this becomes,
or if this becomes the official way for Python, you know, I don't know,
3.17 or something.
I mean, it could be several years.
And so, I just want everyone not to panic.
- Yeah, exactly.
- This doesn't get turned on in October.
- No, and this is super interesting.
Yeah, so it's accepted, but it only appears in your Python runtime
if you build it with this.
So, I imagine, you know, some people will build it themselves,
but someone also just created a Docker container with Python built with this,
and you can get the free-threaded Docker version or whatever, right?
- We've already put out conda packages as well.
So, if you want to build a conda environment...
- Okay.
- Yeah, actually, if you jump over to the Py free-thread page.
- Yeah, tell people about this.
- Yeah.
So, you know, we didn't make this.
This is the community made this, the scientific Python community put
this together, and this is a really great resource, again, focused on,
you know, that community which really wants threading because we have a lot of,
you know, heavy numerical computation.
And so, this is a good resource for things like, how do you install it?
So, there's a link there on what are your options for installing the
free-threaded CPython?
You can get it from Ubuntu or PyEnv or conda.
If you go look at the, you know, and you can build it from source.
And so, there's also...
- A container, yeah.
- Yeah, and there's also a compatibility status tracker which is being updated
manually to see which of your, you know, again, this is focused,
I think, yeah, down one more link.
- Where is the...
Oh, there it is, yeah.
- There it is, yeah.
So, these are, again, this is very focused on the kind of things the scientific
Python community cares about, but these are things like, you know,
have we ported Cython?
Have we ported NumPy?
Is it being automatically tested?
Which release has it?
And the nice thing actually is Pip, as of 24.1, I believe, can tell the difference
between wheels for regular Python and free-threaded Python.
- Oh, you can tell by the...
There's different wheels as well?
- Yeah, so there's a, you know, Python has always had this thing called an
ABI tag, which is just a letter that you stick after the version number.
And T is the one for free-threading.
And so, now a project can choose to upload wheels for both versions and make it easier
for people to test out stuff.
So, for example, I mean, Cython, it looks like there are nightly wheels
already being built.
And so, this is, you know, they're moving fast.
And, you know, definitely, you know, and in our condo, we're also very interested
in getting into this as well.
So, that's why we built the condo package for free-threading, and we're going to start
looking at building more condo packages for these things in order to be able
to facilitate testing.
Because I think the biggest thing we want to make sure is, if you want to know if your
code works, you want the quickest way to get an environment to have some place to test.
- Yeah.
- And so, making this more accessible to folks is a really high priority.
- This is cool.
There was something like this for Python 2 to 3, I remember.
It showed, like, the top 1,000 packages on PyPI, and then how many of them were compatible
with Python 3, basically, by expressing their language tag or something like that.
- Yep, yep.
- So, this is kind of like that.
It's also kind of like the "Can I use?"
I don't know if you're familiar with this.
- Yes.
- "Can I use?" from the web dev world, where you go and say...
- Oh, yeah.
Oh, awesome.
Yeah, yeah, I've seen this.
- You go and say, "I want to use this.
I want to use this feature."
If I want to say "web workers" or something like that, it'll show you all the browsers
and all the versions, and when were they supported.
And this sounds a little bit like that, but for free-threaded Python.
Which, by the way, free-threaded Python is the terminology, right?
Not "no-gil," but "free-threaded."
- Yes.
That is what they've decided.
I think they're worried about people trying to talk about "no-no-gil" or...
I don't know.
- "Gill-ful."
- Yeah, exactly.
- "Gill-ful Python."
Are you running on a gill-ful?
You know.
Oh, my gosh.
- Okay.
Interesting.
Now, we have a few other things to talk about, but we don't have really much time to talk
about them.
But there was one thing that we were maybe going to talk about a bit with compiling.
You mentioned some talk or something where people were talking about, "Well, what if
we had a static-languaged Python and we compiled it?"
And related to that, Mr. Magnetic says, "Could a Python program be compiled into a binary,
like a JAR or a Go app or whatever?"
- Yeah, there are other tools that look at that as a standalone executable.
So, yeah, one of the things I just wanted to shout out a colleague of mine at Anaconda,
Antonio Cuny, who is a well-known PyPy developer from long ago.
He's worked on PyPy for 20 years.
- Right.
- He's been working...
- And not the package installing thing, but the JIT compiler.
- Oh, yes.
- PYPY.
- Yes.
- Sometimes phonetically, like over audio, that's hard to tell.
- Yes, yeah, yeah.
So he's been thinking about this stuff for a very long time.
And his sort of key insight that at least clicked in my head was that Python is hard
to compile because it is so dynamic.
I can, in principle, modify the attributes, like even the functions of a class at any
point in the execution of the program.
I can monkey-patch anything.
I can do...
This dynamicness is really great for making kind of magical metaprogramming libraries
that do amazing things with very little typing.
But it makes compiling them really hard.
Because you don't get to ever say, "Okay, this can't ever change."
And so what he's been trying to do with a project called Spy, which he gave a talk on
at PyCon 2024, but I think the recordings aren't up yet for that.
And so there isn't a...
I don't think there's a public page on it, but he does have a talk on it.
Because I think they've got the keynotes up.
But the key kind of insight for me for Spy was to recognize that in a typical Python
program, all of the dynamic metaprogramming happens at the beginning.
You're doing things like data classes generating stuff and all kinds of things like that.
And then there's a phase where that stops.
And so if we could define a sort of variant of Python where those two phases were really
clear, then you would get all of the dynamic expressiveness, almost all the dynamic expressiveness
of Python, but still have the ability to then feed that into a compiler tool chain and get
a binary.
So this is super early R&D experimental work, but I think that's a really great way to approach
it because often there's always been this tension of, "Well, if I make Python statically
compilable, is it just C with different keywords?
Do I lose the thing I loved about Python?"
Which was how quickly I could express my idea.
And so this is, again, to having your cake and eating it too.
This is trying to find a way to split that difference in a way that lets us get most
of the benefits of both sides.
That's pretty interesting.
And hopefully that talk's up soon.
That'd be really neat.
Maybe by the time this episode's out.
I know the PyCon videos are starting to roll, not out on YouTube, but out on the podcast
channels.
It'll be interesting.
It would be fantastic to have, "Here's my binary of Python.
Take my data science app and run it.
Take my desktop app and run it."
I don't care what you have installed on your computer.
I don't need you to set up Python 3.10 or higher on your machine and set up a virtual
environment.
Just, "Here's my binary."
Do it as you will.
That's another.
I throw that in with the mobile apps and the front end, or the desktop apps, or the front
end Python.
That's another one of those things that nobody's pushing towards it.
Well, not nobody.
Not that many people are pushing towards it because there's not that many use cases for
it that people are using it for because it was so challenging that people stopped trying
to do that.
Yeah, that's one thing I also...
People probably hear me say this too many times, but most people use apps when they
use a computer, not packages or environments.
And so in the Python space, we are constantly grappling with how hard packages and environments
are to work with, talk with, decide again, what languages are in, do I care about everything
or just Python or whatever?
It's all very hard, but that's actually not how most people interact with a computer at
all.
And so it really is one of those things.
Again, this is one of the reasons I'm so interested in Beware is briefcase is like the app packager.
And the more they can push on that, the more we have a story.
Again, there are other tools that have been around for a long time, but that's just what
I think about a lot.
But we need to focus on tools for making apps because that's how we're going to share our
work with 99% of the earth.
Yes.
Yeah, 100%.
I totally agree.
And lots of props to Keith Russell-Magee and the folks over at Beware for doing that and
for you guys supporting that work because it's one of those things where there's not
a ton of people trying to do it.
It's not like, well, we're using Django, but is there another way we could do it?
It's basically the same thing, right?
It's creating a space for Python where it kind of, I know there's PyInstaller and Py2App,
but it's pretty limited, right?
Yeah, there's not a lot of effort there.
And so there are a few people who've been doing it for a long time and others are getting
more into it.
And yeah, I wish that we could get more focus on it because there are tools, they just don't
get a lot of attention.
Yeah, and they're not very polished and there's so many edge cases and scenarios.
All right, let's close it out with just a final thought on this little topic and then
I'll let you wrap this up for us.
Do you think that's maybe a core developer thing?
I mean, I know it's awesome that Py2App and PyInstaller and PyFreeze are doing their things,
that Togr are doing their things to try to make this happen, but I feel like they're
kind of looking in at Python and go, how can we grab what we need out of Python and jam
it into an executable and make it work?
Should we be encouraging the core developers to just go like a Python, MyScript, dash dash
Windows and they're out, you get in .exe or something?
I don't know, actually, that would be a great question.
Actually, I would ask Russell that question.
He would have probably better perspective than I would.
Because at some level, it is a tool that is dealing with a lot of problems that aren't
core to the Python language.
And so maybe having it outside is helpful, but maybe there's other things that the core
could do to support it.
I mean, again, a lot of it has to do with the realities of when you drop an application
onto a system, you need it to be self-contained.
You need to, sometimes you have to, do you have to trick the import library to know where
to find things and all of that.
That's exactly what I was thinking, is if Python itself didn't require operating system
level fakes to make it think, if it could go like, here is a thing in memory where you
just import, this is the import space.
It's this memory address for these things.
And we just run from the .exe rather than dump a bunch of stuff temporarily on disk
and port it through, that kind of weirdness that happens sometimes.
Yeah, there is probably definitely improvements that could be made to the import mechanism
to support applications.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, we've planted that seed.
Maybe it will grow, we'll see.
All right, Stan, this has been an awesome conversation.
Give us a wrap up on all this stuff, just like sort of final call to action and summary
of what you guys are doing in Anaconda, because there's a bunch of different stuff we talked
about that are in this space.
Yeah, I mean, mainly I would say, I would encourage people that if you want to speed
up your Python program, you don't necessarily have to leave Python.
Go take a look at some of these tools, go measure what your program's doing, look at
tools like Numba, but there are other ones out there, PyTorch and Jax and all sorts of
things.
There are lots of choices now for speed.
And so Python doesn't have to be slow.
You just have to sort of figure out what you're trying to achieve and find the best tool for
that.
So one other thing I do want to shout out, I'm teaching a tutorial in a month over at
the Anaconda sort of live tutorial system, which will be how to use Numba.
So if something you saw here you want to go deep on, there will be a tutorial, hopefully
linked in the show notes or something.
Yeah, I can link that in the show notes.
No problem.
Absolutely.
So I'll be going in.
Is that the high performance Python with Numba?
Yes.
So yeah, we'll be doing worked examples and you'll get to ask questions and all that
stuff.
Cool.
I'll make sure to put that in the show notes so people can check it out.
All right.
Well, thanks for sharing all the projects that you guys are working on and just the
broader performance stuff that you're tracking.
Yeah, awesome.
Glad to chat.
You bet.
See you later.
Bye.